docs: add guidance for defining events (#3749)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/how-to-write-conventions/README.md

#### Defining events

> Follow [Semantic conventions for events](/docs/general/events.md).

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/ea2afe754872c70cc2f1e267bef6028f52a6dadf

#### Defining events

Events describe named occurrences at a meaningful point in time.

> This section covers standalone events represented by `LogRecord`s. See

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
This section covers events represented by `LogRecord`s. See
```

Author: 6de77e179c3c81c70b1b593ab90d4eb22be9608a

[Semantic conventions for events](/docs/general/events.md) for general event
semantics.

When to define events:

> - The occurrence is significant for your observability needs.

Reviewer: let's remove this one and later refactor this doc to outline common parts like this one.

Author: 1020555b41b73e202e705bfe43952b27de040c9d

  named events - emit regular log records (not modeled as events) instead.

Events often complement span definitions. Events can be emitted inside or outside
an active trace context.

Use an event instead of a span attribute when the data describes a distinct
occurrence within the operation, can happen zero or more times for the same span,
or needs its own timestamp, severity, or occurrence-specific attributes.
Use a span attribute when the data describes the operation as a whole, especially
when it is useful for sampling or is known when the span starts.

An event definition should describe when the event is recorded and what
domain-specific occurrence it represents in the instrumented component, the
[event name](#event-naming-pattern), which [timestamp](#timestamps) to use,
the default [severity](#severity), and the applicable
[attributes](#event-attributes).

##### Event naming pattern

Semantic conventions MUST document the event name.

Event names uniquely identify an event structure. When users query for a specific
event name, they should get events that comply with the corresponding semantic
convention.

> - Event names MUST be low-cardinality.

Reviewer: let's remove this and p3 already covers this aspect

Author: 8d176a9757562f9a00692e2839b26fb8e1e6d896

- Event names SHOULD follow the [Naming guidelines](/docs/general/naming.md).
- Event names SHOULD NOT include runtime values. Use attributes for identifiers,
  names, or other values that vary per occurrence.
- Use a domain-specific name when the event is tied to a specific operation or
  system. For example, `http.client.request.exception` represents exceptions
  during HTTP client requests.
- Use a shared name only when the same definition applies to all occurrences
  recorded with that name.

When recording events from an existing system that does not have a single event
name, follow [External event compatibility](/docs/general/events.md#external-event-compatibility).

##### Timestamps

Events MUST have
[Timestamp](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-timestamp)
set to the time when the event occurred.

Semantic conventions MUST document which occurrence time should be used as the
event timestamp when it is not obvious, especially for events received from

> external systems.

Reviewer 2: For events received from external systems should we recommend to use (original) occurrence time when available?

Author: Indeed, I tried to capture it in the Timestamp section.

Author: > For events received from external systems 

Probably we will move this part to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md

Author: 4e3b963e5ba2e56c41d8fd250cb8e71d5db3227b

Author: 0287b04f123438b35e5cd187dbfc810d25ea22b1

> Semantic conventions MUST NOT mandate a value for

Author: consistency

```suggestion
Semantic conventions MUST NOT define a value for
```

[ObservedTimestamp](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-observedtimestamp);
SDKs, collectors, or other components SHOULD populate it to reflect when the
event was observed/received.

##### Severity

Semantic conventions SHOULD specify a default
[severity number](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-severitynumber).

Define the severity number based on the expected impact of the occurrence.
If the same event can have different severity depending on context, document the
conditions for setting each severity.

For exception events, follow the severity guidance in
[Semantic conventions for exceptions in logs](/docs/exceptions/exceptions-logs.md#severity).

Semantic conventions SHOULD NOT define a
[severity text](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-severitytext)
value only to mirror the severity number short name. If instrumentation receives
a meaningful severity string from an external system, document how that string

> is mapped to severity number and whether it is preserved as severity text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

we can always add it later once we know what's the best practice

Author: 4e3b963e5ba2e56c41d8fd250cb8e71d5db3227b

##### Event attributes

Semantic conventions MUST document the event attributes.

Use attributes to represent structured event details and context:

- Reuse existing attributes when possible, especially attributes that are used on
  related spans, metrics, resources, or other events.
- Include attributes that users are likely to filter, group, aggregate, or
  correlate on.
- When the event is normally associated with a span, avoid copying every span
  attribute by default. Reference span-level attributes on the event only when
  they are needed to understand, route, or retain the event without the span.
- Prefer flat attributes when the value can be represented clearly without
  structure. Use complex attributes only when the structure is part of the
  event semantics and a flat representation would be awkward or lossy.
- Include `error.type` when the event represents a failure that users need to
  classify.
- Specify [requirement level](/docs/general/attribute-requirement-level.md) and
  tailor the brief and note to the event.
- Document attributes that may contain sensitive information, be expensive to
  collect, have high cardinality, or be especially large.

> Semantic conventions MUST NOT define a value for

Reviewer: let's return back note on human-readable representation that we have in events.md

Author: 551569af0d480241fea779d2ca7676493bc48c7e

> [body](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-body).

Author: addressed via https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/37f74738f667ffa3b59475c211a0884eb5911b4f

#### Defining events

Events describe named occurrences at a meaningful point in time.

This section covers standalone events represented by `LogRecord`s. See
[Semantic conventions for events](/docs/general/events.md) for general event
semantics.

When to define events:

- The occurrence is significant for your observability needs.
- The occurrence does not require a new trace context or child operations.
- The occurrence represents a checkpoint, state change, or outcome in a longer
  operation or asynchronous flow.

For example, define events for application interactions, state transitions,
feature flag evaluations, and exceptions that occur while an operation is being
executed.

When not to define events:

- For operations with a duration and meaningful operation boundary - use spans
  instead.
- For properties that describe a whole span and do not need their own timestamp -
  use span attributes instead.
- For details that are already captured by an existing event definition with the
  same meaning and structure - reuse or extend the existing event definition
  instead.
- For unstructured diagnostic messages that are not intended to be queried as

>   named events - use logs instead.

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/2a39735da95880523ea8c898170c14719ecb3499

event name, they should get events that comply with the corresponding semantic
convention.

- Event names MUST be low-cardinality.
- Event names SHOULD follow the [Naming guidelines](/docs/general/naming.md).
- Event names SHOULD NOT include runtime values. Use attributes for identifiers,
  names, or other values that vary per occurrence.
- Use a domain-specific name when the event is tied to a specific operation or
  system. For example, `http.client.request.exception` represents exceptions
  during HTTP client requests.
- Use a shared name only when the same definition applies to all occurrences
  recorded with that name.

When recording events from an existing system that does not have a single event
name, follow [External event compatibility](/docs/general/events.md#external-event-compatibility).

##### Timestamps

Events MUST set
[Timestamp](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-timestamp)
to the time when the event occurred.

Events MUST NOT set
[ObservedTimestamp](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-observedtimestamp).

> 

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/2a39735da95880523ea8c898170c14719ecb3499

#### Defining events

Events describe named occurrences at a meaningful point in time.

This section covers standalone events represented by `LogRecord`s. See
[Semantic conventions for events](/docs/general/events.md) for general event
semantics.

When to define events:

- The occurrence is significant for your observability needs.
- The occurrence does not require a new trace context or child operations.
- The occurrence represents a checkpoint, state change, or outcome in a longer
  operation or asynchronous flow.

> For example, define events for application interactions, state transitions,

Reviewer 3: lets also expand example to explicitly callout lifecycle moments like service startup, config reload, shutdown complete etc.

Author: Addressed https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/dd257e68b22049abf598a51b461ee39f94dc2b51

> feature flag evaluations, and exceptions that occur while an operation is being

Reviewer 3: should we explicitly state that Events can be done inside or outside an active trace context?

Author: Addressed https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/dd257e68b22049abf598a51b461ee39f94dc2b51

Use a span attribute when the data describes the operation as a whole, especially
when it is useful for sampling or is known when the span starts.

An event definition should describe the
[occurrence it represents](#what-occurrence-does-this-event-represent), the
[event name](#event-naming-pattern), when instrumentations should record it,
which [timestamp](#timestamps) to use, the default [severity](#severity), whether
the event is expected to be recorded with a parent span context, and the
applicable [attributes and body](#event-attributes-and-body).

##### What occurrence does this event represent

Define the scope and meaning of the occurrence:

- When the event is recorded, including the timestamp it represents.
- Whether the event is recorded once, can be recorded multiple times, or is
  recorded for both start and end checkpoints.
- Whether the event is meaningful only when associated with a parent span, or
  whether it can also be emitted independently.
- Conditions under which instrumentation SHOULD or SHOULD NOT record the event.

If the event can be emitted independently of a span, define enough attributes to
make the event useful without relying on span attributes.

> Define separate events for occurrences that have different meanings, different

Reviewer 3: does this indirectly mean that an Event will always have same severity? Or same event can have diff. severity based on outcomes.?

https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/pull/2010#discussion_r2801073031 discussion concluded severity can vary based on outcome.

Author: > does this indirectly mean that an Event will always have same severity?

No.

> Or same event can have diff. severity based on outcomes.?

Yes. I think this is covered later in the "Severity" section.

#### Defining events

Events describe named occurrences at a meaningful point in time.

This section covers standalone events represented by `LogRecord`s. See

> [Semantic conventions for events](/docs/general/events.md) for general event

Reviewer: do we still need that file? we don't have anything similar for spans or metrics.

I'd prefer to remove it and replace with the content of this PR.

Author: We do have something similar for metrics: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/metrics.md#general-guidelines

Because of this I think we should consider tackling this in a separate PRs for both events and metrics.

Reviewer: meeting discussion: let's move this content. over to events.md

Author: 8bccd93de4ed6d207e96014136f5ba3cfe51ea03

semantics.

When to define events:

- The occurrence is significant for your observability needs.
- The occurrence does not require a new trace context or child operations.
- The occurrence represents a checkpoint, state change, or outcome in a longer

>   operation or asynchronous flow.

Reviewer: we have most of these in examples below. It seems this is a criteria and I think we should mention it's a point-in-time (rather than operation with significant duration)

Author: >  think we should mention it's a point-in-time (rather than operation with significant duration)

I feel that this can be to strong and be in conflict with e.g.:
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3727
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/2133

Reviewer 4: How is `it's a point-in-time` in conflict with #2133?
Individual lifecycle events each represent a point-in-time.

I think that adding that an event is a point-in-time is a good addition.

I would consider #3727 more of a border case since it does represent a point-in-time when timings were observed, just that the attributes are for the observed durations.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/d28d21c49e7ad5593fab94734f99b4fdaefdf293

> For example, define events for application interactions, state transitions,

Reviewer: what's "application interactions" and do we need to mention them here (given how broad they are)? HTTP request from one service to another is an interaction

Author: I will change to "user interaction"

Author: 6144b73cf715b3011c866b9c406b0da370d5a491

feature flag evaluations, lifecycle moments such as service startup,
configuration reload, or shutdown completion, and exceptions that occur while an
operation is being executed.

When not to define events:

> - For operations with a duration and meaningful operation boundary - use spans

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For operations that have a duration and meaningful boundary - use spans
```

  instead.

> - For properties that describe a whole span and do not need their own timestamp -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For properties that describe a whole operation and do not need their own timestamp -
```

  use span attributes instead.

> - For details that are already captured by an existing event definition with the

Reviewer 3: this seems not required. it must be obvious right?

Author: Maybe seems obvious for us, not sure if it obvious for AI that may use this information e.g. during reviewing :wink:

Author: Similar thread https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/files#r3337642069

  same meaning and structure - reuse or extend the existing event definition

>   instead.

Reviewer: we have this for spans because it's a common pitfall to capture the same span from different points (ORM and DB driver) and therefore define two different types of spans. Not sure if this important for events at least yet, maybe remove it ?

Author: This could be a problem in the future. I think it can also help AI in reviews.

Author: Similar thread https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/files#r3319456638

- For unstructured diagnostic messages that are not intended to be queried as

>   named events - emit regular log records (not modeled as events) instead.

Reviewer 3: lets be explicit that - OTel semantic convention only cover named Events, not unstructured log messages?

Author: This is not entirely true. See: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/logs.md

Author: 1a99295e089cbadcf0082b78ba66ef9249adfe7c

Events often complement span definitions. Events can be emitted inside or outside
an active trace context. If an event is emitted while a related span is active,

> instrumentations should associate the event with the corresponding span context.

Author: ```suggestion
an active trace context.
```

> instrumentations should associate the event with the corresponding span context.

Reviewer 3: nit:
instrumentation should associate the event - this feels like a OTel sdk guide/spec. Probably skip it here.
Or you included to make sure the instrumentation author takes care of propagating appropriate context to the places where events are created (especially. for languages requiring explicit context management?)

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/e5af1aac49421993a416e5670820067c505372e8

> Events do not create trace context and do not have child spans.

Reviewer 3: this statements reads odd...not sure why we need to list it.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Use an event instead of a span attribute when the data describes a distinct
occurrence within the operation, can happen zero or more times for the same span,
or needs its own timestamp, severity, or occurrence-specific attributes.
Use a span attribute when the data describes the operation as a whole, especially
when it is useful for sampling or is known when the span starts.

An event definition should describe the
[occurrence it represents](#what-occurrence-does-this-event-represent), the
[event name](#event-naming-pattern), when instrumentations should record it,
which [timestamp](#timestamps) to use, the default [severity](#severity), whether
the event is expected to be recorded with a parent span context, and the

> applicable [attributes and body](#event-attributes-and-body).

Reviewer: we are not going to define bodies in semconv, so maybe just add a single sentence here about the body and remove it from the section title?

Author: Related discussion https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749#discussion_r3325623493

Author: Addressed https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/40eb39ef38a39c098d2977c18d41a9daaeec00b7

##### What occurrence does this event represent

Define the scope and meaning of the occurrence:

> - When the event is recorded, including the timestamp it represents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When the event is recorded and what domain-specific occurrence it represents in the instrumented component.
```

- Whether the event is recorded once, can be recorded multiple times, or is

>   recorded for both start and end checkpoints.

Reviewer: do we need this point? this is a bit too specific to start/stop operation. It's essentially part of the even definition.

E.g. operation-terminating exception is recorded once per corresponding operation  and multiple times per process lifetime and RPC message is recorded multiple times per RPC span - this is by definition and when to record it should be obvious from it.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/8db6082288344b1cb345dcff3af3580c9e412840

- Whether the event is meaningful only when associated with a parent span, or

>   whether it can also be emitted independently.

Reviewer: Do we need this? It should be possible to consume events independently of spans and sampling should be controlled by the user via Logger.Enabled - semconv or instrumentation code should not really care?

> - Conditions under which instrumentation SHOULD or SHOULD NOT record the event.

Reviewer: do we need this right away?  it seems to overlap with severity, sampling, and event definition. We also have metric requirement level which we should probably extend to other signals and then have a common section for it.

If the event can be emitted independently of a span, define enough attributes to
make the event useful without relying on span attributes.

Define separate events for occurrences that have different meanings, different

> severity, or a significantly different set of attributes. Reuse the same event

Reviewer: > different  severity

I think we wanted severity to be dynamic? E.g. exceptions can be Fatal or Trace

Author: It can be. See https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/files#r3318399018

Author: I also addressed this in https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/8db6082288344b1cb345dcff3af3580c9e412840

definition across multiple operations when it represents the same occurrence and
has the same event name, severity guidance, and attribute structure.

##### Event naming pattern

Event names uniquely identify an event structure. When users query for a specific
event name, they should get events that comply with the corresponding semantic
convention.

- Event names MUST be low-cardinality.
- Event names SHOULD follow the [Naming guidelines](/docs/general/naming.md).
- Event names SHOULD NOT include runtime values. Use attributes for identifiers,

>   names, or other values that vary per occurrence.

Reviewer: isn't it implied by low-cardinality and naming (first two points)?

Author: I do not think it is covered by "Naming guidelines" and I think many reader may find "Event names MUST be low-cardinality" as pretty vague.

Reviewer: this doc targets semconv authors and this is technically impossible to define events with dynamic names

Reviewer 4: Indeed in current semconv, the event name cannot be dynamic.
Example: `The event name MUST be 'browser.web_vital'.`

Author: e123431bfe97e6c196283a60d8678f16515c26c4

> - Use a domain-specific name when the event is tied to a specific operation or

Reviewer 3: do we specify anything about the name being fully qualified?

Author: "Naming guidelines" says that names should use  namespaces. 

 have not seen anything similar for metrics so I am not sure if this needs addressing or how it should be addressed. 

Moreover, we already have 

> Event names uniquely identify an event structure. 

Is it not enough?

Author: bf20e48df9f685d05a58120e8ab35e4ae810755a

  system. For example, `http.client.request.exception` represents exceptions
  during HTTP client requests.
- Use a shared name only when the same definition applies to all occurrences
  recorded with that name.

When recording events from an existing system that does not have a single event

> name, follow [External event compatibility](/docs/general/events.md#external-event-compatibility).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Maybe replace it with a statement somewhere above that semantic conventions MUST NOT be defined for logs without event name. I.e. semconv authors that define mapping from external system MAY invent event names (based on some other properties in the external event occurrence).

Author: Related https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749#discussion_r3340775959

For now I prefer keeping the current statement.

Reviewer 2: From SIG discussion, could consider moving this to specification repo (bridging events)

Author: 0287b04f123438b35e5cd187dbfc810d25ea22b1

##### Timestamps

Events MUST set
[Timestamp](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-timestamp)

> to the time when the event occurred.

Reviewer: I think this is enforced by the API and we don't need to mention it here? The doc can recommend to record events at the time there were observed (so timestamp is recorded by the SDK) or not mention timestamp at all since it's covered in spec?

Author: > I think this is enforced by the API and we don't need to mention it here? 

It is not (sic!) https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/api.md#emit-a-logrecord

Author: I did my best to address it here https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/f15a8996c115f48c7ad21c643548347481ab2577

Semantic conventions SHOULD NOT mandate a value for
[ObservedTimestamp](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-observedtimestamp);
SDKs, collectors, or other components SHOULD populate it to reflect when the

> event was observed/received.

Reviewer: maybe semantic conventions should not leverage ObservedTimestamp unless it defines mapping from an external system that has this notion?

Author: Timestamp should be used for mapping from an external system. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-timestamp

> maybe semantic conventions should not leverage ObservedTimestamp

Author: ```suggestion
Semantic conventions MUST NOT mandate a value for
[ObservedTimestamp](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-observedtimestamp);
SDKs, collectors, or other components SHOULD populate it to reflect when the
event was observed/received.
```

a meaningful severity string from an external system, document how that string
is mapped to severity number and whether it is preserved as severity text.

##### Event attributes and body

Semantic conventions that define events MUST document the event name and
attributes. See [General event semantics](/docs/general/events.md#general-event-semantics).

Use attributes to represent structured event details and context:

- Reuse existing attributes when possible, especially attributes that are used on
  related spans, metrics, resources, or other events.
- Include attributes that users are likely to filter, group, aggregate, or
  correlate on.
- When the event is normally associated with a span, avoid copying every span
  attribute by default. Reference span-level attributes on the event only when
  they are needed to understand, route, or retain the event without the span.
- Prefer flat attributes when the value can be represented clearly without
  structure. Use complex attributes only when the structure is part of the
  event semantics and a flat representation would be awkward or lossy.
- Include `error.type` when the event represents a failure that users need to

>   classify.

Reviewer: failure or an outcome of operation that can be a success or failure

Author: Are you sure? I think this is against https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/recording-errors.md and  https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/registry/attributes/error.md#error-type e.g. 

> Operations that complete successfully SHOULD NOT include the `error.type` attribute, allowing users to filter out errors.

> If the operation has completed successfully, instrumentations SHOULD NOT set `error.type`.

Reviewer: this is about definition of the event, not about recording specific item

Author: 30efef7a26954b0493c876b5bef0b91aab43a8b6

- Specify [requirement level](/docs/general/attribute-requirement-level.md) and
  tailor the brief and note to the event.
- Document attributes that may contain sensitive information, be expensive to
  collect, have high cardinality, or be especially large.

> Events SHOULD NOT use

Reviewer 5: 👍🏼

[body](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.57.0/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-body)
except to represent a string display message of the event. Do not put structured

> event fields in the body when they can be defined as event attributes.

Reviewer 5: It would be really helpful to provide a few examples to illustrate all this guidance.

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/blob/main/rust/otap-dataflow/docs/telemetry/events-guide.md#the-message-attribute Sharing what I've written for OTel Arrow project. (its also in-dev stage)

Author: It seems that we do not want the semconv to define Body at all https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749#discussion_r3337553111

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3749/commits/40eb39ef38a39c098d2977c18d41a9daaeec00b7

Author: Also see https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/1870
